README.md, before:

# Sharks from Space – Chiwinners

![Model Overview](docs/img/model.png)

This repository contains the end-to-end data and modeling stack for the **NASA Space Apps Challenge 2025 – Sharks from Space** (Team: **Chiwinners**).  

It includes: dataset mocks with a final target schema, download & transform pipelines, a hybrid **MaxEnt + BINN** modeling module, lightweight simulation tools, and loaders to publish artifacts for the web app.

---

## 1) Mathematical Modeling

### 1.1 Problem framing
We aim to estimate **habitat suitability** and **foraging probability** for sharks by combining **presence-only environmental modeling** (MaxEnt) with a **Bayesian Inference Neural Network (BINN)** that fuses environmental covariates, tag-derived features, and explicit spatial priors. Presence points come from **blue shark** tag locations; we denote the presence label as **`SHARKS`**.

### 1.2 Environmental covariates (x, t)
We consider the following environmental variables sampled on a spatiotemporal grid:

| Variable | Meaning (unit) | Role |
|---|---|---|
| **SST** | Sea Surface Temperature (°C) | thermal habitat |
| **dSST (DSST)** | Horizontal temperature gradient magnitude (°C/km) | frontal/edge dynamics |
| **DEPTH** | Seafloor depth / bathymetry (m, positive down) | geomorphic constraint |
| **EKE** | Eddy Kinetic Energy (m²/s²) | mesoscale turbulence |
| **LIGHT** | Light availability / PAR proxy (mol photons m⁻² d⁻¹ or W m⁻²) | photic effects |
| **CHL** | Chlorophyll-a (mg m⁻³) | productivity proxy |

We define:

```math
\mathbf{x}(s,t) = [\text{SST}, \; \text{dSST}, \; \text{DEPTH}, \; \text{EKE}, \; \text{LIGHT}, \; \text{CHL}]
```


### 1.3 MaxEnt (presence-only suitability)

MaxEnt estimates a distribution over space–time that is maximally entropic subject to feature expectation constraints.  
In the logistic approximation for presence–background modeling, the **habitat suitability** (or relative occurrence intensity) can be written as:

```math
S(s,t) = \sigma\!\Big( \beta_0 + \sum_{j} \beta_j \, f_j\!\big(\mathbf{x}(s,t)\big) \Big)
```

where $f_j$ are (possibly transformed) covariates (linear, spline, thresholds) and $\sigma(z)=1/(1+e^{-z})$.  
Coefficients $\beta_j$ are fit to match empirical expectations under presence vs. background.  

**Interpretation.** $S(s,t)\in(0,1)$ is a **suitability surface**: higher values indicate environmental conditions more consistent with observed presences.


### 1.4 BINN (Bayesian Inference Neural Network) for foraging
We further predict **foraging behavior** with a BINN that integrates:
- **Environmental covariates** $\mathbf{x}(s,t)$
- **Tag-derived variables** $\mathbf{z}_{\text{tag}}(s,t)$
- **MaxEnt suitability** $S(s,t)$ as an **informative prior**
- A **spatial regularizer** tied to the **Seaflower** MPA (Colombian Caribbean)

Let $\mathbf{z}(s,t) = [\mathbf{x}(s,t), \mathbf{z}_{\text{tag}}(s,t)]$.  
The BINN outputs a **foraging probability**:

$$
P(FH = 1 \mid \mathbf{z}(s,t)) = \sigma\Big( g_{\theta}(\mathbf{z}(s,t)) + \alpha \cdot \text{logit}(S(s,t)) + \lambda \cdot R_{SF}(s) \Big)
$$

where $g_{\theta}(\cdot)$ is a neural network (likelihood term),  
$\text{logit}(S) = \ln\frac{S}{1 - S}$ injects **MaxEnt** as a **prior** (weight $\alpha$),  
and $R_{SF}(s)$ is a Seaflower-based spatial regularizer (e.g., mask or distance-to-boundary), weighted by $\lambda$.

**Why BINN?** BINNs allow us to (i) retain a **principled prior** from presence-only ecology (MaxEnt), (ii) **fuse heterogeneous signals** (environment + tag dynamics), and (iii) **encode spatial knowledge** (MPA constraints) as a soft regularizer—improving robustness and ecological plausibility of foraging predictions.

**Outputs.**
- $S(s,t)$: habitat suitability.
- $P(\mathrm{FH}=1\mid \cdot)$: foraging probability surface.  
Both can be exported as rasters, tiles, or vector **GeoJSON** (contours/isolines or polygons after post-processing).

### 1.5 Seaflower (ecological context)
**Seaflower** is a large, biodiversity-rich marine region in the Colombian Caribbean, with coral reefs, seagrass meadows, and key habitats for pelagic species. We use a Seaflower polygon/mask to softly regularize predictions, aligning the model with known conservation areas and expected ecological patterns.

---

## 2) Data Flow / Pipeline

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A["Downloads (OB.DAAC / AVISO / other)<br/>extract/"] --> B["Raw samples per source<br/>downloads/&lt;var&gt;/sample/*"]
  B --> C["Inspect & QC<br/>transform/&lt;var&gt;/inspect.ipynb"]
  C --> D["Partitioned Parquet<br/>transform/&lt;var&gt;/sample/year=/month="]
  D --> E["Unification (OBT)<br/>utils/unify_datasets.py → data/schema"]
  E --> F1["MaxEnt training<br/>model/train_maxent.py"]
  F1 --> G1["Suitability S(s,t)"]
  E --> F2["BINN training<br/>model/train_binn.py"]
  G1 --> F2
  F2 --> G2["Foraging probability<br/>P(FH=1|·)"]
  G1 --> H["Prediction / Export<br/>model/predict.py → GeoJSON"]
  G2 --> H
  H --> I["Publish to Azure<br/>load/load.py → web app"]
```

**Key artifacts.**  
- **OBT** (One Big Table): analysis-ready join of tag + environmental covariates.  
- **GeoJSON exports**: region polygons (e.g., Seaflower), convex hulls, and predicted foraging zones.

---
## 3) Expert rules

| **Rule Name**                         | **Description (Ecological Explanation)**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | **Key References**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **1. Gradient Aggregation Rule**      | Sharks tend to aggregate along **strong physical gradients** such as sea surface temperature (SST), sea surface height (SSH), or chlorophyll (Chl) fronts. These gradients mark **edges of mesoscale eddies and upwellings** that concentrate prey from lower trophic levels. | - Braun et al. (2019) *Mesoscale eddies release pelagic predators from thermal constraints.* **PNAS**.<br>- Scales et al. (2014) *Mesoscale fronts as ecological hotspots for marine predators.* **J. Marine Systems**.<br>- Arostegui et al. (2023) *Anticyclonic eddies aggregate pelagic predators in the open ocean.* **NOAA Tech Report.** |
| **2. Lagged Productivity Rule**       | **Predator response lags** behind peaks in primary production (phytoplankton/chlorophyll). When chlorophyll increases, prey abundance rises days or weeks later. Incorporating **time-lagged chlorophyll anomalies** better represents real predator-prey dynamics.           | - Behrenfeld & Boss (2014) *Resurrecting the ecological underpinnings of ocean color.* **Science.**<br>- Hazen et al. (2013) *Predicted habitat shifts of Pacific top predators in a changing climate.* **Nature Climate Change.**<br>- Block et al. (2011) *Tracking apex marine predator movements in a dynamic ocean.* **Nature.**               |
| **3. Optimal Thermal–Eddy Zone Rule** | Sharks prefer **intermediate temperatures** and **moderate eddy intensities**, where prey is concentrated but conditions remain stable for foraging. Too high/low SST or overly strong eddies reduce prey accessibility.                                                      | - Queiroz et al. (2016) *Ocean-wide tracking of pelagic sharks reveals extent of overlap with longline fishing hotspots.* **PNAS.**<br>- Gaube et al. (2018) *Mesoscale eddies influence the movement of pelagic predators.* **Nature Communications.**<br>- Scales et al. (2018) *On the front lines: frontal zones as priority regions for marine conservation.* **Nat. Ecol. Evol.** |


## 4) How to run the project

### 4.1 Create and activate a virtual environment
```bash
# Windows (PowerShell)
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# macOS / Linux
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```

### 4.2 Install dependencies
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 4.3 Environment variables
Create a `.env` file (or set at runtime) with:
```
EARTHDATA_TOKEN=<your_earthdata_token>
AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME=<your_account>
AZURE_STORAGE_KEY=<your_key>
```
- `EARTHDATA_TOKEN`: NASA Earthdata/OB.DAAC downloads.
- `AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME`, `AZURE_STORAGE_KEY`: publish artifacts for the web app.

### 4.4 Typical commands (E2E)
```bash
# 1) Download samples (per source)
bash extract/bash/download_sst.sh
python extract/python/clorophyll.py
python extract/python/eke.py
python extract/python/depth.py

# 2) Inspect & transform to partitioned Parquet
#   (see transform/<var>/inspect.ipynb and transform/<var>/transform.ipynb)

# 3) Unify into OBT / analysis-ready tables
python utils/unify_datasets.py

# 4) Train models
python -m model.train_maxent --config model/config.py
python -m model.train_binn  --config model/config.py

# 5) Predict & export
python -m model.predict --region seaflower --out load/data/seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson

# 6) Publish to Azure
python load/load.py --file load/data/seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson --blob-key seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson
```

### 4.5 Clean repository tree for docs (optional)
Generate a tree that excludes heavy/ephemeral directories:
```bash
# Git Bash / MINGW64 / macOS / Linux
find .   -path "./downloads/*/data*" -prune -o   -path "./.venv*" -prune -o   -path "./.git*" -prune -o   -print | sed 's|[^/]*/| |g' | sed 's| | |g' > tree.txt
```
Embed `tree.txt` into docs as needed.

---

## 5) Modules overview

- **`data/`** – Mock datasets in the final, analysis-ready schema + **`data_dictionary.txt`**.
- **`downloads/`** – Source-specific folders with `sample/` files and `metadata.txt` (download notes, URLs if any).
- **`transform/`** – Notebooks/scripts to **inspect** raw samples and **normalize** to the final schema (partitioned by `year=/month=`).
- **`model/`**
  - `maxent.py` — habitat suitability (presence-only).
  - `binn.py` — BINN classifier for foraging (uses MaxEnt prior + spatial regularizer).
  - `features.py`, `data_io.py`, `sampling.py`, `utils.py` — feature engineering and IO.
  - `train_maxent.py`, `train_binn.py` — training entry points.
  - `predict.py` — batch/geo prediction utilities.
  - `config.py` — central configuration.
- **`extract/`** – Bash/Python downloaders (NASA/OB.DAAC and others).
- **`load/`** – Publish artifacts (e.g., GeoJSON) to **Azure Blob Storage**.
- **`simulation/`** – Mock sensor generator for end-to-end tests.
- **`docs/`** – Diagrams, images, documentation assets.
- **`utils/`** – Local helpers (inspection, sampling, unification, AOI checks).

---

## 6) Notes & acknowledgements
- Keep secrets in `.env`; do not commit credentials or large raw datasets.
- Large raw data live under `downloads/*/sample/` (and optionally `downloads/*/data`) and are excluded from doc trees.  
- NASA Earthdata / OB.DAAC; AVISO products where applicable.  
- Built for NASA Space Apps 2025 by **Team Chiwinners**.

Commit message:

docs: add description to Expert Rules

README.md, after:

# Sharks from Space – Chiwinners

![Model Overview](docs/img/model.png)

This repository contains the end-to-end data and modeling stack for the **NASA Space Apps Challenge 2025 – Sharks from Space** (Team: **Chiwinners**).  

It includes: dataset mocks with a final target schema, download & transform pipelines, a hybrid **MaxEnt + BINN** modeling module, lightweight simulation tools, and loaders to publish artifacts for the web app.

---

## 1) Mathematical Modeling

### 1.1 Problem framing
We aim to estimate **habitat suitability** and **foraging probability** for sharks by combining **presence-only environmental modeling** (MaxEnt) with a **Bayesian Inference Neural Network (BINN)** that fuses environmental covariates, tag-derived features, and explicit spatial priors. Presence points come from **blue shark** tag locations; we denote the presence label as **`SHARKS`**.

### 1.2 Environmental covariates (x, t)
We consider the following environmental variables sampled on a spatiotemporal grid:

| Variable | Meaning (unit) | Role |
|---|---|---|
| **SST** | Sea Surface Temperature (°C) | thermal habitat |
| **dSST (DSST)** | Horizontal temperature gradient magnitude (°C/km) | frontal/edge dynamics |
| **DEPTH** | Seafloor depth / bathymetry (m, positive down) | geomorphic constraint |
| **EKE** | Eddy Kinetic Energy (m²/s²) | mesoscale turbulence |
| **LIGHT** | Light availability / PAR proxy (mol photons m⁻² d⁻¹ or W m⁻²) | photic effects |
| **CHL** | Chlorophyll-a (mg m⁻³) | productivity proxy |

We define:

```math
\mathbf{x}(s,t) = [\text{SST}, \; \text{dSST}, \; \text{DEPTH}, \; \text{EKE}, \; \text{LIGHT}, \; \text{CHL}]
```


### 1.3 MaxEnt (presence-only suitability)

MaxEnt estimates a distribution over space–time that is maximally entropic subject to feature expectation constraints.  
In the logistic approximation for presence–background modeling, the **habitat suitability** (or relative occurrence intensity) can be written as:

```math
S(s,t) = \sigma\!\Big( \beta_0 + \sum_{j} \beta_j \, f_j\!\big(\mathbf{x}(s,t)\big) \Big)
```

where $f_j$ are (possibly transformed) covariates (linear, spline, thresholds) and $\sigma(z)=1/(1+e^{-z})$.  
Coefficients $\beta_j$ are fit to match empirical expectations under presence vs. background.  

**Interpretation.** $S(s,t)\in(0,1)$ is a **suitability surface**: higher values indicate environmental conditions more consistent with observed presences.


### 1.4 BINN (Bayesian Inference Neural Network) for foraging
We further predict **foraging behavior** with a BINN that integrates:
- **Environmental covariates** $\mathbf{x}(s,t)$
- **Tag-derived variables** $\mathbf{z}_{\text{tag}}(s,t)$
- **MaxEnt suitability** $S(s,t)$ as an **informative prior**
- A **spatial regularizer** tied to the **Seaflower** MPA (Colombian Caribbean)

Let $\mathbf{z}(s,t) = [\mathbf{x}(s,t), \mathbf{z}_{\text{tag}}(s,t)]$.  
The BINN outputs a **foraging probability**:

$$
P(FH = 1 \mid \mathbf{z}(s,t)) = \sigma\Big( g_{\theta}(\mathbf{z}(s,t)) + \alpha \cdot \text{logit}(S(s,t)) + \lambda \cdot R_{SF}(s) \Big)
$$

where $g_{\theta}(\cdot)$ is a neural network (likelihood term),  
$\text{logit}(S) = \ln\frac{S}{1 - S}$ injects **MaxEnt** as a **prior** (weight $\alpha$),  
and $R_{SF}(s)$ is a Seaflower-based spatial regularizer (e.g., mask or distance-to-boundary), weighted by $\lambda$.

**Why BINN?** BINNs allow us to (i) retain a **principled prior** from presence-only ecology (MaxEnt), (ii) **fuse heterogeneous signals** (environment + tag dynamics), and (iii) **encode spatial knowledge** (MPA constraints) as a soft regularizer—improving robustness and ecological plausibility of foraging predictions.

**Outputs.**
- $S(s,t)$: habitat suitability.
- $P(\mathrm{FH}=1\mid \cdot)$: foraging probability surface.  
Both can be exported as rasters, tiles, or vector **GeoJSON** (contours/isolines or polygons after post-processing).

### 1.5 Seaflower (ecological context)
**Seaflower** is a large, biodiversity-rich marine region in the Colombian Caribbean, with coral reefs, seagrass meadows, and key habitats for pelagic species. We use a Seaflower polygon/mask to softly regularize predictions, aligning the model with known conservation areas and expected ecological patterns.

---

## 2) Data Flow / Pipeline

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A["Downloads (OB.DAAC / AVISO / other)<br/>extract/"] --> B["Raw samples per source<br/>downloads/&lt;var&gt;/sample/*"]
  B --> C["Inspect & QC<br/>transform/&lt;var&gt;/inspect.ipynb"]
  C --> D["Partitioned Parquet<br/>transform/&lt;var&gt;/sample/year=/month="]
  D --> E["Unification (OBT)<br/>utils/unify_datasets.py → data/schema"]
  E --> F1["MaxEnt training<br/>model/train_maxent.py"]
  F1 --> G1["Suitability S(s,t)"]
  E --> F2["BINN training<br/>model/train_binn.py"]
  G1 --> F2
  F2 --> G2["Foraging probability<br/>P(FH=1|·)"]
  G1 --> H["Prediction / Export<br/>model/predict.py → GeoJSON"]
  G2 --> H
  H --> I["Publish to Azure<br/>load/load.py → web app"]
```

**Key artifacts.**  
- **OBT** (One Big Table): analysis-ready join of tag + environmental covariates.  
- **GeoJSON exports**: region polygons (e.g., Seaflower), convex hulls, and predicted foraging zones.

---
## 3) Expert rules

Since no ground-truth labels of shark foraging zones are available, we rely on expert-derived ecological rules as a proxy for validation. These rules are extracted from scientific literature and domain knowledge about shark behavior and oceanographic processes.

| **Rule Name**                         | **Description (Ecological Explanation)**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | **Key References**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **1. Gradient Aggregation Rule**      | Sharks tend to aggregate along **strong physical gradients** such as sea surface temperature (SST), sea surface height (SSH), or chlorophyll (Chl) fronts. These gradients mark **edges of mesoscale eddies and upwellings** that concentrate prey from lower trophic levels. | - Braun et al. (2019) *Mesoscale eddies release pelagic predators from thermal constraints.* **PNAS**.<br>- Scales et al. (2014) *Mesoscale fronts as ecological hotspots for marine predators.* **J. Marine Systems**.<br>- Arostegui et al. (2023) *Anticyclonic eddies aggregate pelagic predators in the open ocean.* **NOAA Tech Report.** |
| **2. Lagged Productivity Rule**       | **Predator response lags** behind peaks in primary production (phytoplankton/chlorophyll). When chlorophyll increases, prey abundance rises days or weeks later. Incorporating **time-lagged chlorophyll anomalies** better represents real predator-prey dynamics.           | - Behrenfeld & Boss (2014) *Resurrecting the ecological underpinnings of ocean color.* **Science.**<br>- Hazen et al. (2013) *Predicted habitat shifts of Pacific top predators in a changing climate.* **Nature Climate Change.**<br>- Block et al. (2011) *Tracking apex marine predator movements in a dynamic ocean.* **Nature.**               |
| **3. Optimal Thermal–Eddy Zone Rule** | Sharks prefer **intermediate temperatures** and **moderate eddy intensities**, where prey is concentrated but conditions remain stable for foraging. Too high/low SST or overly strong eddies reduce prey accessibility.                                                      | - Queiroz et al. (2016) *Ocean-wide tracking of pelagic sharks reveals extent of overlap with longline fishing hotspots.* **PNAS.**<br>- Gaube et al. (2018) *Mesoscale eddies influence the movement of pelagic predators.* **Nature Communications.**<br>- Scales et al. (2018) *On the front lines: frontal zones as priority regions for marine conservation.* **Nat. Ecol. Evol.** |


## 4) How to run the project

### 4.1 Create and activate a virtual environment
```bash
# Windows (PowerShell)
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# macOS / Linux
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```

### 4.2 Install dependencies
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 4.3 Environment variables
Create a `.env` file (or set at runtime) with:
```
EARTHDATA_TOKEN=<your_earthdata_token>
AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME=<your_account>
AZURE_STORAGE_KEY=<your_key>
```
- `EARTHDATA_TOKEN`: NASA Earthdata/OB.DAAC downloads.
- `AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME`, `AZURE_STORAGE_KEY`: publish artifacts for the web app.

### 4.4 Typical commands (E2E)
```bash
# 1) Download samples (per source)
bash extract/bash/download_sst.sh
python extract/python/clorophyll.py
python extract/python/eke.py
python extract/python/depth.py

# 2) Inspect & transform to partitioned Parquet
#   (see transform/<var>/inspect.ipynb and transform/<var>/transform.ipynb)

# 3) Unify into OBT / analysis-ready tables
python utils/unify_datasets.py

# 4) Train models
python -m model.train_maxent --config model/config.py
python -m model.train_binn  --config model/config.py

# 5) Predict & export
python -m model.predict --region seaflower --out load/data/seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson

# 6) Publish to Azure
python load/load.py --file load/data/seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson --blob-key seaflower_zf_prediction.geojson
```

### 4.5 Clean repository tree for docs (optional)
Generate a tree that excludes heavy/ephemeral directories:
```bash
# Git Bash / MINGW64 / macOS / Linux
find .   -path "./downloads/*/data*" -prune -o   -path "./.venv*" -prune -o   -path "./.git*" -prune -o   -print | sed 's|[^/]*/| |g' | sed 's| | |g' > tree.txt
```
Embed `tree.txt` into docs as needed.

---

## 5) Modules overview

- **`data/`** – Mock datasets in the final, analysis-ready schema + **`data_dictionary.txt`**.
- **`downloads/`** – Source-specific folders with `sample/` files and `metadata.txt` (download notes, URLs if any).
- **`transform/`** – Notebooks/scripts to **inspect** raw samples and **normalize** to the final schema (partitioned by `year=/month=`).
- **`model/`**
  - `maxent.py` — habitat suitability (presence-only).
  - `binn.py` — BINN classifier for foraging (uses MaxEnt prior + spatial regularizer).
  - `features.py`, `data_io.py`, `sampling.py`, `utils.py` — feature engineering and IO.
  - `train_maxent.py`, `train_binn.py` — training entry points.
  - `predict.py` — batch/geo prediction utilities.
  - `config.py` — central configuration.
- **`extract/`** – Bash/Python downloaders (NASA/OB.DAAC and others).
- **`load/`** – Publish artifacts (e.g., GeoJSON) to **Azure Blob Storage**.
- **`simulation/`** – Mock sensor generator for end-to-end tests.
- **`docs/`** – Diagrams, images, documentation assets.
- **`utils/`** – Local helpers (inspection, sampling, unification, AOI checks).

---

## 6) Notes & acknowledgements
- Keep secrets in `.env`; do not commit credentials or large raw datasets.
- Large raw data live under `downloads/*/sample/` (and optionally `downloads/*/data`) and are excluded from doc trees.  
- NASA Earthdata / OB.DAAC; AVISO products where applicable.  
- Built for NASA Space Apps 2025 by **Team Chiwinners**.
